In this video,
we're going to talk about the onboard
expansion connectors on the DragonBoard.
As an overview, the DragonBoard
contains several expansion connectors,
a high speed and low speed connector which
conform to a 96 board specification.
And the pin notes for those connectors
are different when viewed from the Android
software or the Linux Debian software.
The DragonBoard also contains
an analog expansion connector which is
unique to the DragonBoard and not
available on other 96 board form factor.
This analog expansion is really useful for
adding microphones and
speakers so
that you can give audio to your projects.
So now, we'll delve a little deeper
into the low speed connector and
then the high-speed connector.
This is the pin out for
the low speed connector as you find
in the 96 boards specification.
Not all of these groups of pins will
make sense to you at first, but
as you progress,
they will make more sense.
So I'm going to start at the upper
left and work my way down and
then on the upper right and work my
way down through the groups of pins.
And talk a little bit about
what each group does.
So, the first group is
the UART connections.
So this is the Universal Asynchronous
Receiver Transmitter or UART.
Typically used for communications with
terminals, low speed peripherals.
Speeds between as slow
as 300 bits per second
up to little over a 100
kilobits per second.
So, not nearly as fast as USB,
but a very universal connection.
There are two UART ports on the board.
UART0 is what they call
a four-pin UART port.
So it has a transmit data, a receive data,
and two handshaking signals,
the request to send and
clear to send handshaking signals.
This is where the peripheral tells the
board that it has something to send and
the board tells the peripheral that yes,
you can go ahead and
send it with the clear to send.
The second UART port is only two-pins.
It's assumed to always be
ready to send and transmit.
So we removed the request to send and
clear to send pins.
The second UART port
is nearly always used as the serial
console to the operating system.
So this is very useful when you're
bringing up an operating system to find
out if anything is alive because
is the most, the simplest.
The most universal peripheral available
on all computers is a simple UART port.
[COUGH] Excuse me.
The next group of pins is the I2C port.
This is a specification that is useful for
connecting multiple peripherals to.
And you'll find many low speed
peripherals such as accelerometers,
gyros, light sensors, simple keyboards,
touch pads,
touch screens that all connect with I2C.
The I2C ports run typical at
10 kilobytes per second up to
about a 100 kilobytes per second.
So it's in the same speed
range as the UART ports, but
the protocol is very different.
As you progress through building projects
you'll find many I2C peripherals that you
can buy and attach to this board, and they
all connect through these two connections.
The next group of pins is what we call
GPIO or General Purpose Input/Output pins.
These pins can be configured as in input
to read a simple device, like a switch.
Or an output,
to control a simple device like an LED.
Or you can use groups of GPIOs
to control multiple switches,
multiple LEDs, and
build more complex peripherals.
Typically the speed of
things connected to GPIO
is in the 1 to maybe
100 actions per second.
Rarely much more that this because it
is completely software controlled and
the software requires time to
get around to doing things.
The next group of pins is
the power supply pins.
These power supplies, 1.8 volts and
5 volts with respect to
ground are provided by
the DragonBoard to your peripherals.
This allows you to power up things
that you have attached to the other
ports on the board.
Typically the 1.8 volts supply is used for
an I/O voltage and 5 volt is used for
more significant power.
Starting down the right
hand side of the column,
we see in the upper right,
the I can't see it either.
Give me a moment, which port is that,
Robert?
>> Power button,
reset button?
>> Okay, I'll back up a bit.
The next group of pins in the upper right
is the power button and the reset button.
When you look at the DragonBoard,
you will see that there is a physical
power button and
reset button on the board.
But When you attach a mezzanine
board on top of the DragonBoard,
you can't physically reach them.
So what we've done is we've
brought the signals for
the power button and the reset
button up to the mezzanine board.
And designers of mezzanine boards
can put an additional power and
reset button on their board.
This group of pins is the SPI pins.
This is a serial peripheral interface.
It is very similar to UART and
I2C, but it is yet
another protocol in which
the data going out and
the data coming back are separated and
there is also a clock signal.
To tell the peripheral when to receive
each bit of data and that there
is a chip select signal to select
the chip that you've attached externally.
So this is yet another low speed
protocol typically used for
devices in the one megabit per second
to 40 megabits per second range.
But it can run slower and
it can run slightly faster
depending on your peripheral.
You'll actually see some of the mezzanine
boards that are available actually using
this, four things like
analog to digital converters
This group of pins is the pulse
coded modulation or PCM pins.
This is typically used for
audio codex, microphones, speakers,
and similar peripherals that
transmit audio in and out.
Finally, we have the system DCIN pins.
These pins are an exact copy of the pins
that are on the power connector,
down in this corner of the board.
Normally, if you connect the power
connector to the board then
SYS_DCIN would be used to power your
devices on your Mezzanine board that
you've brought above the board.
But there is also a possibility
of using SYS_DCIN to
take power down to the DragonBoard.
If you do this then you don't need
to connect an external power supply.
This is a level of detail that
will require some design work, and
it will be particularly useful if you
are designing a battery mezzanine board so
that you could build a stand along system.
For instance in a drone.
Moving on from the low speed connector,
let's talk about the high speed connector.
The high speed connector is this white
connector on the board with 60 pins.
This gives you access to much higher speed
interfaces than we had on
the low speed connector.
So the first high speed interface we have,
this group of pins can
be used as an SD card.
So you could put a second SD card
slot on a mezzanine board and
have access to two SD
cards at the same time.
The set of pins also
has dual functionality.
It can also be used as another SPI port,
so you can connect another SPI
device to this group of Pins.
Which set of pins you get is dependent
upon the manufacturer of the board.
So not all 96Boards will be the same.
Some will have SPI, some will have SDIO,
and others may have neither of those.
They are all optional.
This group of pins is the MIPI CSI port.
The clock for the port is on the left and
the MIPI CSI,
which is the camera standard interface,
is very high speed port.
The four lanes of MIPI CSI each run
at over a gigabit per second and
when combined you have over four gigabits
per second of data coming from the camera.
This is a very high speed interface, and
requires very careful attention to signal
layout when building a mezzanine board
This group of signals is
the second MIPI CSI port.
This port only has two lanes of data, and
one lane of clock along
with a master clock.
So, it's for smaller cameras
typically five mega pixels and below.
But again, is two gigabits per
second combined on the two lanes
This group of pins is the MIPI DSI port,
which is the display standard interface.
This allows you to connect a LCD
display or an OLED display.
And each lane in the MIPI DSI runs
at over a gigabit per second, so
you can refresh even very
large displays quite quickly.
Finally, we've come down to the USB port.
This is the secondary USB port, so if you
need a third USB port in your system,
nearly all 96 Boards implement
a extra USB port on this lane.
This is an alternate form of USB port.
It's intended for devices that are
connected directly and not using a cable.
So this is HSIC, or
the High Speed InterChip USB.
These ports are 480 megabits
per second and very useful for
attaching embedded peripherals
on your mezzanine board.
For instance,
a USB hub chip would attach here easily.
Finally, we have two more I2C ports.
Usually this I2C ports are used for
the two cameras to control things like
the auto focus motor to keep the cameras
focused on the right object.
But they can be used as
general purpose I2C ports and
connect more I2C peripherals.
This completes our walk through
of the high speed connector.
Next I'm going to cover the,
can I have slide back, [LAUGH].
This slide presents the low
speed connector in a much more
visually clear form.
One of things you will notice is
the numbers of the GPIOs on the left and
the numbers of the GPIOs
on the right are different.
This is because the two major operating
systems on the board, Android and
Linux, use different representations for
the pins.
So Android uses numbers
that are based above 902.
Whereas Linux or Debian uses numbers
that are based just above 1.
This is for your reference only and makes
it easier to understand what numbers you
should be using when you're
attempting to access GPIOs.
Here's a more visual representation
of the 410 Low-Speed pin out.
As you can see,
some of the blocks are grayed-out.
These blocks are called reserved on
this board, it's because the DragonBoard
410 does not implement those optional
features of the low speed connector.
But the important features of the low
speed connectors, the GPIOs, UARTs, and
I2C are all implemented and
available for your use.
The next section we're going to cover
is the analog expansion connector.
The analog expansion
connector in the DragonBoard,
allows connections of speakers,
headphones, stereo headphones,
microphones, and an FM antenna for
receiving FM signals.
These are expansions beyond
the 96 Boards spec but
things that we felt,
you would find very useful.
There is an application
note called the stereo
connector application note available
from developer.qualcomm.com.
That gives you the details and
it gives you sample circuits of connecting
things to this expansion connector.
Hopefully this will incite you to
new ideas of things you can do with
the DragonBoard now that you have analog
audio input and output capability.
The analog expansion connector is
explained in much more detail in
the stereo connector application note
available on developer.qualcomm.com.
This isn't a link
directly to the App Note,
you will have to navigate your way
through the system and find the App Note.
It's along with all of the other
App Notes on this board.
Finally, as usual, we have the resources.
The Qualcomm Developer Network,
the 96Boards Specification page,
and the 96Boards GitHub page.
Hopefully this will inspire
you to build new and
better things using the DragonBoard.